---
title: "NIST in a nutshell: 800-38{A,G}"
date: 2021-11-08T00:00:00-07:00
---

NIST 800-38A is a now-outdated publication describing the modes of operation for AES in conjunction with a symmetric key cipher. Its successor, NIST 800-38G, is the authoritative recommendation on modes of operation for cryptographic ciphers. These two modes are named `FF1` and `FF3`. Both are general-purpose, utilizing a common block cipher, rather than 38A's myriad of suggested ciphers.

The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) requires conformance testing of this recommendation.

***

# 800-38A

> Thus, there are three new elements in this recommendation: 1) the extension of the four confidentiality modes in FIPS Pub 81 for use with any FIPS-approved block cipher; 2) the revision of the requirements for these modes; and 3) the specification of an additional confidentiality mode, the CTR mode, for use with any FIPS-approved block cipher.

The document assumes a FIPS-approved symmetric key block cipher algorithm has been chosen, and some key $K$ is distributed to the parties involved in the communication.

## Overview of Cipher Modes

Mode | Acronym | Confidentiality Mode? | What does it do?
:-|:-:|:-:|:-
Electronic Codebook | ECB | ❌ | Using $K$, each block is enciphered to the same ciphertext every time.
Cipher Block Chaining | CBC | ✅ | Use the previous ciphertext output of the algorithm as an input to its next run.
Cipher Feedback Mode | CFB | ✅ | Instead of operating directly on the plaintext, XOR the plaintext with outputs from the algorithm run on previous outputs of itself.
Output Feedback Mode | OFB | ✅ | Iterate on an initialization vector, then XOR it with the plaintext to produce ciphertext.[^1]
Counter Mode | CTR | ✅ | Encipher a set of input blocks that we XOR with the plaintext to produce ciphertext.

## ECB

Encipherment is described by $C_j = C_K(P_j)$ for $j = 1, \dots, n$. Decipherment is described by $P_j = C^{-1}_K(C_j)$ for $j = 1, \dots, n$.

To illustrate this concept, imagine that you have a string `S = aaaassaa`, you a block size of 2, and we're using the Caesar Cipher with a shift of 1 (i.e, $K = 1$). That is, we shift our letters along the alphabet by one character (e.g., `a --> b`, `b --> c`, ...) to encipher them.

Then, under some key, $K$, $C_K(S_1) = bb$, $C_K(S_2) = bb$, $C_K(S_3) = tt$, and $C_K(S_4) = bb$. If you are looking closely, you might realize -- cipher choice aside -- how awful this is for security in files with a lot of repeating characters or bytes. It makes the file easy to crack.

## CBC

Encipherment is described by $C_j = C_K(P_j \oplus C_{j-1})$, where $C_0$ is some **random** initialization vector (IV).

Decipherment is described by $P_j = C^{-1}\_K(C_j) \oplus C\_{j-1}$ , where $C_0$ is the same initialization vector as the other party.

The important thing to note here is the **randomness of the initialization vector**. This is what is commonly referred to in the cryptography world as a **number used only once (nonce)**. The CBC mode of operation uses only one to get things started. Afterwards, it depends on the output of the previous iteration of the algorithm!

## CFB

TODO

## OFB

TODO

## CTR

TODO

# 800-38G

TODO

[^1]: Sound familiar? 