---
title: "Alternative Protocols for the WWW"
slug: alternative-protocols-for-the-www
date: 2022-02-12T11:16:59-08:00
tags:
  - thoughts
toc: false
---

I saw a strange link on a GitHub repo the other day that was prefixed with `gemini://`.
I was confused and tried looking up "gemini protocol" online, but to no avail. I brushed
it off as a weird startup alternative to HTTP and went on with my day.

That was, until my friend Waylon[^1] shot me a message a week or two later:

```
waylon — 02/09/2022
have you seen this https://gemini.circumlunar.space/

leo — 02/09/2022
I've heard about Gemini
Hmmmm haven't seen a lot
Lemme read
So better HTTP?
```

> So better HTTP?

Ehhhh, no. With some closer investigation, it's an alternative protocol for the web. It's still
focused on delivering content, but just in a more privacy-motivated, cozy way. You can write a
server or client for it *very* simply in only a handful of lines in almost any language. You can
write a fully-fleshed out client in maybe 100 or 200 SLOC[^2].

Here's an `inetd`-compatible ""server"" in POSIX-compliant shell I wrote in a minute or two:

```sh
#!/bin/sh
chdir $1
shift

if [ $# -ne 1 ]; then
  echo -n "50 Ill-formatted request"
  exit 0
fi

uri=$(printf '%b\n' "$@" | sed -n 's/^gemini:\/\/.*\/\(.*\)$/\1/p')

if ! [ -r $uri ]; then
  echo -n "40 Page does not exist\r\n"
  exit 0
fi

MIME="$(file -b --mime-type $uri)"
if echo "$uri" | grep -q ".*\.gmi"; then
  MIME="text/gemini"
fi

echo -n "20 $MIME;\r\n"
cat $uri
```

To use this you would just add a line to your `/etc/inetd.conf`:

```
127.0.0.1:1965  stream  nowait  gemini  /path/to/gemini.sh gemini.sh /path/to/chdir
```

This would produce some request-response behavior like this (`\r\n` included for
legibility):

```
<<<<<<<<<<REQUEST
/index.gmi\r\n

>>>>>>>>>>RESPONSE
20 text/gemini;\r\n
hi there
```

I say ""server"" though because it only really just serves the file at a given URI with pretty
minimal URI validation. There's no meaningful logging. Also, you would need a relay for TLS
(so you'd probably want to remap your server port to something else). If you're using `inetd`,
though, you probably have one of those. It isn't the prettiest solution on Earth, but it *could*
get the job done.

For my purposes, I happened to be looking for a more personal way of blogging without making it
HTTP-scrapable. Gemini provides its own integrated markdown-esque markup language for text content,
so things clicked. There's all kinds of different protocols for this stuff, though. IPFS is
an alternative I considered. Adjacent to Gemini specifically, Gopher comes to mind.

# Gemini + Gopher

You don't always need a dozen headers or a packed format with a binary BNF grammar to describe
a text file to a requester. I think that's kind of the point of these new alternative protocols
-- levering modern technologies to make "the web" more accessible and a little less centralized.

Gemini is, in my eyes, one of the most straightforward protocols around when it comes to this.
It doesn't bother trying to be anything it isn't.

No JS means there's no interactivity, really, but that's not an issue if your
content is static. No CSS means there's no definitive style, but that's also not
an issue if your content is static -- the user's client can determine how it should look.

At a technical level, there's already so much abstraction afforded in TCP sockets and TLS
alone, so why bother with adding all of this extra stuff when the ultimate goal of the
protocol is to serve largely text-based content?

How far out can we push this line of power-to-weight[^3], though? Things get weird when
you start looking at Gopher.

Gopher was designed a sort of alternative to HTTP. They were both around in the same
era, and both got a reasonable amount of publicity. I'm too young to ever know "The
Gopher Protocol" was a serious contender for the web, but it was.

Its markup is stripped down compared to HTML, and it revolves around the notion of menu-based
browsing. There's this packed, but semi-legible construct that it uses in responses to
describe menus (pulled from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopher_(protocol))).

```
<<<<<<<<<<REQUEST
/Reference

>>>>>>>>>>RESPONSE
1CIA World Factbook     /Archives/mirrors/textfiles.com/politics/CIA    gopher.quux.org 70
0Jargon 4.2.0   /Reference/Jargon 4.2.0 gopher.quux.org 70      +
1Online Libraries       /Reference/Online Libraries     gopher.quux.org 70     +
1RFCs: Internet Standards       /Computers/Standards and Specs/RFC      gopher.quux.org 70
1U.S. Gazetteer /Reference/U.S. Gazetteer       gopher.quux.org 70      +
iThis file contains information on United States        fake    (NULL)  0
icities, counties, and geographical areas.  It has      fake    (NULL)  0
ilatitude/longitude, population, land and water area,   fake    (NULL)  0
iand ZIP codes. fake    (NULL)  0
i       fake    (NULL)  0
iTo search for a city, enter the city's name.  To search        fake    (NULL) 0
ifor a county, use the name plus County -- for instance,        fake    (NULL) 0
iDallas County. fake    (NULL)  0
```

Don't look at it too long. It's easy to understand why it lost out against HTTP.

The formatting of Gophertext is reminiscent of `troff`'s syntax. The user requests the `Reference`
menu, in plaintext then the server replies with different resources (their types indicated by the
prefixed number), menus, and submenus (`i`). To an untrained eye, there's these strange keywords
"fake" and "(NULL)" popping up all over, references to proxy servers. It's just... strange.

There isn't really much in the way of security for the protocol, and there are unofficial,
somewhat-community-accepted extensions to it for things like media files and binaries.
Overall, it feels like a somewhat reasonable protocol that lost its focus as new things
needed to be incorporated into it.

Its markup is restrained, but wanted to compete with HTML. It wanted to incorporate new media
types, but to do that, it had to incorporate new prefix codes. And once the protocol itself
changes at a fundamental level like that, it's pretty difficult to propagate that change across
the web. Meanwhile in HTTP or Gemini, you simply change the MIME type field. Overall, it's a cool idea, but
with all of these dangling bits it may be a bit of an anachronism and a case study in protocol
design.

These ideas of alternative protocols still catch my eye, though. They're reminiscent of
a web that didn't have a notion of CSS, or JS, or really any moving parts.

It makes you wonder. How different would the Internet be if these protocols had
won out? How would we handle the features that are ubiquitous in the WWW today like CSS
for styling and JS for interactivity?

# The *Real* Web3

After Waylon and I chatted for a bit about the Gemini specification, a fun thought experiment
began.

What if we abandoned what we have today to completely redesign the web? No HTTP. No HTML.
No CSS. No JavaScript. Completely from scratch, but with our lessons-learned from the
present.

Well for one, we wouldn't be throwing out IP. Maybe if we were ambitious we'd redesign it
such that all computers use IPv6, but a flag day is impossible now.

More realistically, I think application-level protocols would be a lot more modular with a
security-first design -- kind of like QUIC. Hosts can stream data between each other on a lighter
protocol that is designed to handle congestion control.

The deep point of discussion, though, is how websites could be rendered without HTML. The one that
seemed to hold our attention best was:

```
waylon — 02/09/2022
what if you had something like this
(except not with HTML primitives)
and instead of serving HTML
web servers served this
and browsers executed it to build a website
I mean that's basically react

I guess what we're doing is just React but cutting out the
js part and pretending HTML doesn't exist 🤔
```

So basically what [dioxus](https://github.com/DioxusLabs/dioxus) is doing: compile down your
dynamically-rendered JSX-like statically-typed markup into some WebAssembly. Dodge the JS runtime
bullet and roll your own from scratch.

This would open up a few interesting discussions about website performance as more ambitious devs
try to roll their own WebAssembly, but I don't think it'd be any different than devs who
roll their own HTTP servers these days.

I encounter problems thinking about this in the same way that I encounter problems trying to
think in more than 3 dimensions. HTML is all I know. React is all I know. For the current web,
it's the same deal. WebAssembly is a step in the right direction of speeding up
and broadening the spectrum of dynamic content on the web, but it's still served as a complement
to JavaScript[^4].

I am skeptical that we'll see a serious transition to a brand new protocol
like QUIC or an exodus from the de jure languages of the web for a long time. To do so would be like
switching the web to IPv6, which - like I said - I'm fairly certain won't be happening anytime soon...
Maybe ever.

These new protocols are around the block, and they won't be replacing anything that's already
around, but it's a lot of fun exploring that big *"what if"*.

***

I might update this article later on.

[^1]: Waylon is one of the smartest people I know. https://www.waylonpeng.com/.
[^2]: https://gemini.circumlunar.space/
[^3]: The Gemini docs describe it as "a new internet protocol which ... strives for maximum power to weight ratio"
[^4]: MDN describes it as complementary to JavaScript. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly
