---
title: "Alternative Protocols for the WWW"
date: 2022-02-12T11:16:59-08:00
---

I saw a strange link on a GitHub repo the other day that was prefixed with `gemini://`.
I was confused and tried looking up "gemini protocol" online, but to no avail. There
really isn't a whole lot of information about this!

I brushed it off as a weird startup alternative to HTTP and went on with my day.

That was, until my friend Waylon[^1] shot me a message a week or two later:

```
waylon — 02/09/2022
have you seen this https://gemini.circumlunar.space/

leo — 02/09/2022
I've heard about Gemini
Hmmmm haven't seen a lot
Lemme read
So better HTTP?
```

> So better HTTP?

Ehhhh, no. With some closer investigation, it's an alternative protocol for the web. It's still
focused on delivering content, but just in a more privacy-motivated, cozy way. You can write a
server or client for it *very* simply in only a handful of lines in almost any language. You can
write a fully-fleshed out client in maybe 100 or 200 SLOC[^2].

I'm serious. Here's an `inetd`-compatible ""server"" in POSIX-compliant shell I wrote in a minute or two:

```sh
#!/bin/sh
chdir $1
shift

uri=printf '%b\n' "$s"

if ! [ -r $uri ]; then
  echo -n "40 Page does not exist\r\n"
  exit 0
fi

MIME="$(file -b --mime-type $uri)"
if grep -q "gemini://.*\/.*\.gmi" "$uri"; then
  MIME="text/gemini"
fi

echo -n "20 $MIME;\r\n"
cat $uri
```

To use this you would just add a line to your `/etc/inetd.conf`:

```
127.0.0.1:1965  stream  nowait  gemini  /path/to/gemini.sh gemini.sh /path/to/chdir
```

This would produce some request-response behavior like this (`\r\n` included for
legibility):

```
<<<<<<<<<<REQUEST
/index.gmi\r\n

>>>>>>>>>>RESPONSE
20 text/gemini;\r\n
hi there
```

I say ""server"" because it only really just serves the file at a given URI with pretty
minimal URI validation. Only trouble is you need a relay for TLS (so you'd probably want to remap your server
port to something else). If you're using `inetd`, though, you probably have one of those.
It isn't the prettiest thing on Earth, but it *could* get the job done.

For my purposes, I happened to be looking for a more personal way of blogging without making it
HTTP-scrapable. Gemini uses its own integrated markdown-esque markup language for text content,
so things clicked. There's all kinds of different protocols for this stuff, though. IPFS is
an alternative I considered.

## Gemini + Gopher

You don't always need a dozen headers or a packed format with a binary BNF grammar to describe
a text file to a requester. I think that's kind of the point of these new alternative protocols
--- levering modern technologies to make "the web" more accessible and a little less centralized.

Gemini is, in my eyes, one of the most straightforward protocols around when it comes to this.
It doesn't bother trying to be anything it isn't.

No JS means there's no interactivity, really, but that's not an issue if your
content is static. No CSS means there's no definitive style, but that's also not
an issue if your content is static -- the user's client can determine how it should look.

At a technical level, there's already so much abstraction afforded in TCP sockets and TLS
alone, so why bother with adding all of this extra stuff when the ultimate goal of the
protocol is to serve largely text-based content?

How far out can we push this line of power-to-weight[^3], though? Things get weird when
you start looking at Gopher.

Gopher was designed a sort of alternative to HTTP. They were both around in the same
era, and both got a reasonable amount of publicity. I'm too young to ever know "The
Gopher Protocol" was a serious contender for the web, but it was.

It's stripped down compared to HTML, and it revolves around the notion of tab-based
browsing.

There's this packed, but still-legible construct that it uses in responses
(pulled from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopher_(protocol))).

```
<<<<<<<<<<REQUEST
/Reference

>>>>>>>>>>RESPONSE
1CIA World Factbook     /Archives/mirrors/textfiles.com/politics/CIA    gopher.quux.org 70
0Jargon 4.2.0   /Reference/Jargon 4.2.0 gopher.quux.org 70      +
1Online Libraries       /Reference/Online Libraries     gopher.quux.org 70     +
1RFCs: Internet Standards       /Computers/Standards and Specs/RFC      gopher.quux.org 70
1U.S. Gazetteer /Reference/U.S. Gazetteer       gopher.quux.org 70      +
iThis file contains information on United States        fake    (NULL)  0
icities, counties, and geographical areas.  It has      fake    (NULL)  0
ilatitude/longitude, population, land and water area,   fake    (NULL)  0
iand ZIP codes. fake    (NULL)  0
i       fake    (NULL)  0
iTo search for a city, enter the city's name.  To search        fake    (NULL) 0
ifor a county, use the name plus County -- for instance,        fake    (NULL) 0
iDallas County. fake    (NULL)  0
```

Don't look at it too long. It's easy to understand why it lost out.

The formatting is reminiscent of `troff`'s syntax. The user requests the `Reference` menu,
then the server replies with different resources (their types indicated by the prefixed
number), menus, and submenus (`i`). Clearly, a text-based browser is intended here in the
same way that HTTP demands one.

Gopher, though, loses a bit of its focus at higher levels. The protocol gets a little cluttered with
the addition of non-canonical file types and optional extensions for media files and more.
To an untrained eye, there's these strange keywords "fake" and "(NULL)" popping up all over,
references to proxy servers. It's just... strange.

At its core, it's a very simple protocol for delivering content. It's a cool idea, but
it may be a bit of an anachronism.

These ideas of packed and simplified content delivery and host-discovery still catch my eye,
though. They're reminiscent of a web that didn't have a notion of CSS, or JS, or really any
moving parts.

It makes you wonder. How different would the Internet be if these protocols had
won out? How would we handle the features that are ubiquitous in the WWW today like CSS
for styling and JS for interactivity?

## The *Real* Web3

After Waylon and I chatted for a bit about the Gemini specification, a fun thought experiment
began.

What if we abandoned what we have today to completely redesign the web? No HTTP. No HTML.
No CSS. No JavaScript. Completely from scratch, but with our lessons-learned from the
present.

Well for one, we wouldn't be throwing out IP. Maybe if we were ambitious we'd redesign it
such that all computers use IPv6, but a flag day is impossible now.

More realistically, I think application-level protocols would be a lot more modular with a
security-first design -- kind of like QUIC. Hosts can stream data between each other on a lighter
protocol that is designed to handle congestion control.

The interesting point, though, is how websites could be rendered without HTML. The one that
seemed to hold our attention best was:

```
waylon — 02/09/2022
what if you had something like this
(except not with HTML primitives)
and instead of serving HTML
web servers served this
and browsers executed it to build a website
I mean that's basically react

I guess what we're doing is just React but cutting out the
js part and pretending HTML doesn't exist 🤔
```

So basically what [dioxus](https://github.com/DioxusLabs/dioxus) is doing: compile down your
dynamically-rendered JSX-like statically-typed markup into some WebAssembly. Dodge the JS runtime
bullet and roll your own from scratch.

This would open up a few interesting discussions about website performance as more ambitious devs
try to roll their own WebAssembly, but I don't think it'd be any different than devs who
roll their own HTTP servers these days.

I encounter problems thinking about this in the same way that I encounter problems trying to
think in more than 3 dimensions. HTML is all I know. React is all I know. For the current web,
it's the same deal. WebAssembly is new and is a step in the right direction of speeding up
and broadening the spectrum of dynamic content on the web, but it's still served as a complement
to JavaScript[^4].

I am skeptical that we'll see a serious transition to a brand new protocol
like QUIC or an exodus from the de jure languages of the web for a long time. To do so would be like
switching the web to IPv6, which I'm fairly certain won't be happening anytime soon... Maybe ever.

These new protocols are around the block, and they won't be replacing anything that's already
around, but it's just so damn fun exploring that big *"what if"*.

[^1]: Waylon is one of the smartest people I know. Find his website here: https://www.waylonpeng.com/.
[^2]: https://gemini.circumlunar.space/
[^3]: The Gemini docs describe it as "a new internet protocol which ... strives for maximum power to weight ratio"
[^4]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly
